Good morning, I'm Bob Wilson,
I'm the manager of the LLVM core team.
Thank you for coming today to find
out about moving to the LLVM compiler.
So let's get started.
One of the big announcements we
made on Monday is that Apple has
moved to the LLVM compiler.
We're building both Mac OS X Lion and
iOS 5 with LLVM-based compilers.
And we're here today to ask
you to do the same thing.
So if you're new here,
or even if you're not,
you may be wondering, what is LLVM?
Or what other compiler would I use?
So before we go into LLVM,
I want to give you a little history
lesson on compilers at Apple.
So for quite a long time now,
Apple has been using
the GNU GCC compiler.
A lot of you are familiar with that.
And that's one of its advantages.
It's portable, it's familiar,
people have been using it.
It has pretty good performance.
We've built a lot of
great software products.
You have built a lot of great
apps using the GCC compiler.
And it works, so that's great.
But it's had some downsides too.
One of those is that the error
messages that you get from GCC are not
always as helpful as they could be.
Sometimes they're downright confusing.
One of the big problems for us is
that we would really like to integrate
the compiler into other tools.
Now, GCC has a 25-year-old
monolithic architecture.
It is a compiler,
and that's all that it is.
You take in source code,
and it puts out object code.
So we'd like to do better than that.
It's also been hard to improve GCC.
I said the performance
has been pretty good,
and it has, but we really want to take
performance up to the next level.
And GCC has been stifling
innovation for us in the compiler.
So we need a better compiler.
And that is LLVM.
That's our LLVM dragon logo up there.
So the architecture of LLVM is
really one of the key things
that makes it work for us.
LLVM is architected as a set of
reusable compiler components.
We can hook them up in different ways,
we can integrate them in different tools.
Some examples of components:
The Clang front end,
which is a unified C, C++,
and Objective-C parser.
It's designed to be really fast.
It's designed to give
good error messages.
Optimizations.
We have a great set of sophisticated
transformations that we can apply
to make your apps run faster.
We have machine code generators
for a variety of targets,
including the Intel and ARM processors
that we use in Apple products.
and we have a set of various
low-level tools such as
assemblers and disassemblers.
So just as an example,
consider the LLDB debugger you
may have heard about this week.
We want to use the Clang front
end in the debugger when you say
print the value of this expression.
We want to allow you to have any
arbitrary expression from the language,
and so we need to have a parser
that can understand that language.
So it makes a lot of sense
to take that front end,
put it in the debugger.
We also want to be able
to set breakpoints,
step through code, disassemble.
So we can take those components
from the LLVM components,
put them into LLDB,
and really integrate everything together.
LLVM is an open source project.
We invite you to visit
us online at LLVM.org.
You can learn more about the project.
You can even get involved and help
out in the development if you want to.
So this is just some background on
LLVM and where we're coming from.
Let's get into the compilers in Xcode.
If you've been using Xcode for a while,
you may have seen we have two
different compilers with LLVM.
The first one is LLVM-GCC,
which takes this high-tech LLVM backend,
symbolized by this race car,
combines that with the
same old GCC front end.
We basically just bolt them together.
It's a little bit awkward,
but it has one big advantage,
and this is why we call
this our legacy compiler.
The GCC front end will accept all the
same code as the GCC compiler did,
because it's the same compiler.
So this has played a useful role
for us and continues to do that,
but it still has the same problems.
You still get the same confusing
error messages from GCC.
You still have the same
monolithic architecture that
keeps us from integrating it.
So it's time to retire that GNU.
We're going to send it out to Pasteur.
and replace that with
the Clang front end,
symbolized by this racehorse.
Now we have all new
LLVM based technology.
They work together really well.
And this is where we're
putting all of our focus for
new features in the compiler.
So in this next part of the talk,
we're going to talk a bit
about some of those features.
One of those that we think
is really helpful that you
will enjoy is diagnostics.
We spend a lot of time trying
to give you error messages that
make it as clear as possible
what the problem in your code is.
We're going to talk about how
LLVM is integrated in Xcode,
so you get the great benefits of the
LLVM compiler without having to leave
the great Xcode IDE environment.
We have a static analyzer.
It deeply analyzes your program
to help find problems before
you even realize they're there.
We've got some new C++ language
features to talk about.
and we've got great performance.
So I want to clarify that
some of these features here
have been in LLVM for a while.
Some of them are brand new in
version 3 of the LLVM compiler.
So we're going to go
through some of these today,
and I'd like to introduce Doug Gregor,
who is our Clang technical lead,
who's going to start us off.
Thank you, Bob.
So we're going to take a look at some of
the features of the Apple LLVM compiler
powered by the Clang front end.
And first we're going to look at
the user interface of the compiler,
since at Apple we're all
about user interfaces.
And so here's our great 1970s command
line technology for using compiler.
Wow.
Run the compiler,
you give it a C source file,
it builds an executable.
This is really boring and uninteresting.
The only important part about this side
of the user interface is that we accept
the same command line options as GCC.
So we're backward compatible with GCC,
and this means if you
have a make file project,
if you have scripts that build code
just by calling the compiler directly,
just replace GCC and G++
with Clang and Clang++.
Command line options are the same,
we support GNU extensions,
so it's drop-in compatibility.
It's very easy to move from
one compiler to the other.
A lot of you probably don't even
use this because you use Xcode,
and that's fine.
The other side of the user interface
are the compiler's diagnostics.
So these you probably see every day,
right?
These are the warnings and the errors
that the compiler generates when it finds
some kind of problem in your source code.
Right?
Maybe you're not conformant
with the standard,
or maybe it just found something
fishy in your source code
it wants to tell you about.
When it finds the problem,
it's going to try to diagnose the problem
internally and explain the problem to you
in simple terms so you can understand how
to fix the problem quickly and move on.
Most important thing of
compiler diagnostics is clarity.
Here's an example where GCC utterly
and completely fails the clarity test.
It's a great error message.
It tells you the parser state at the
point where something went wrong.
Does that help you?
I hope not.
It doesn't help me either.
There's only one important information,
there's only one bit of
useful information here.
And that is the file and the
line where the error happened.
And you can go look at the
source code and figure out
what the actual problem is.
With the Apple LLVM compiler,
we want to do a lot better.
So here we give a clear diagnostic.
It says what the problem is.
This webframe view type
you thought existed,
it doesn't exist.
There's no type by that name,
maybe because you forgot
to include a header.
We also show the line of source
code where the problem happens,
and the little green caret points
exactly to the line and column
where this problem occurred.
So you look at the right part of
your source code to fix the problem.
The last thing we do,
if you're actually using the terminal,
you will see this coloration here,
just to try to bring your eye to the
part that matters of the source code.
So you can find the errors quickly,
sort through the diagnostic that you get,
and fix the problem.
There are a number of innovations
in the way the Apple LLVM compiler
presents diagnostics to really help you
understand the problem and fix it fast.
One of those is diagnostic ranges.
So here we have an example where we have
some problem with the binary expression.
So the subtraction operation doesn't
work because the types are wrong.
So we have a text description
that shows what the problem,
describes what the problem is,
but we also show you with the caret
exactly which operation failed.
Right, where's the problem?
And it's going to highlight with
the little underlines the left and
right hand sides of that operation,
so that on busy lines where
you have a lot of operators,
you have a lot of operands going on,
you can see exactly what the
compiler is talking about.
With some diagnostics,
this is absolutely critical,
because here we have a whole
ton of equal signs on the line.
We don't think there's assignment.
There wasn't meant to be assignment.
Here it is.
The compiler is going to point out,
this is the place where
you made a mistake.
In this case,
you used assignment instead of equality.
And with that diagnostic range
information with the caret,
you can find that problem very quickly.
Something we introduced last
year was spell checking.
So a lot of the mistakes
we make as programmers are
we just mistype something,
we miscapitalize it.
So here I have this little mistake
where I was a little bit lazy on
the shift key when I was typing,
and I capitalized the
U in NSMutableArray.
The compiler could say,
"I don't know what the NSMutableArray
identifier means," and leave you at that,
and you'll stare at it for a while
before you realize the height of the
bars and the U is a little bit too high.
Instead what it does is it
realizes you tried to name
something that doesn't exist,
so it's going to look at all the names
that would have made sense at that
particular point in your program.
And if it finds something close,
it will suggest that something close
with a spell checking diagnostic.
So this year,
we've taken this a little bit
further and tried to make it better.
So it recognizes more
names in more places,
it provides better corrections,
recovers from those corrections better,
and it actually can get to the point
now where we can correct for mistyped
keywords to really deal with any of the
problems that you show up in your source
code that are simple typing mistakes.
Now spell checking is an interesting,
different kind of
diagnostic from the others.
So with the previous diagnostics we saw,
the compiler told you
there was a problem,
but it didn't necessarily know
what kind of fix to apply here.
With spell checking it says,
this is the problem and
here is the solution.
Fix it to take that one step further
and actually show you how the solution
would look in your source code.
So what we're doing here is the same
NSMutableArray example we saw earlier,
where we suggest a correction.
Now here in the output,
we've underlined the mistyped NSMutable
array with the wrong capital U to tell
you this is the part of the code you
need to change to fix the problem.
And underneath in green,
we're saying this is the fix to apply.
Here's the text you put up there
in replacing the underlying
text to solve the problem.
So fixits are really, really great,
because they find the little
syntactic annoyances like dropped
open square brackets on message
sends for nested message sends,
or missing semicolons at the end
of an expression that you actually
wanted to turn into a statement.
And fixits can really,
really help solve these little
problems quickly that add up
to wasting your developer time,
just to get you to the point where you
can actually build your app and test it,
do the interesting part of development.
So let's talk about something new.
We've introduced a bunch of new
warnings into the Apple LLVM compiler,
and one of the big new classes
of warnings are warnings
on uninitialized variables.
So here in this example,
we have some variable delta,
and we have a call to transform that uses
a block that happens to refer to delta.
The Apple LLVM compiler wouldn't
give any warnings on this previously.
Now we can produce a warning
that describes exactly
what's going wrong here.
So here we have not initialized delta,
and yet we've captured in a block.
So the Apple LLVM compiler will tell you
this through a warning that says delta
is uninitialized at the point of capture,
and refer back to the variable
delta through this extra note.
We'll see these a little bit more later.
Through this extra note that
points out what variable of delta
is actually being referred to,
because what may have happened here is
you're referring to the wrong variable,
not that it's actually an
uninitialized variable.
Now, with uninitialized warnings,
these were available in GCC and LLVM GCC,
and have been for a long time.
There's one really
annoying aspect of them,
which is that they depended
on how the optimizer ran.
So this means that as the optimizer found
different ways to optimize your code,
you would get different
warnings out of this,
which is infuriating.
And more importantly,
when you did this with GCC,
you wouldn't get warnings if
the optimizer wasn't turned on.
So your debug builds,
the most important place
to see these warnings,
you would never actually get
any benefits of this warning.
In the Apple LLVM compiler,
we wanted to do better,
and the way we did this is to implement
these warnings in the front end,
so that you get the exact
same behavior in debug mode,
in release mode,
it doesn't depend on any of the
back end optimization stuff.
So we realize,
so with uninitialized warnings,
we also realized that the
optimizer in GCC didn't always
produce useful warnings.
And so with the Apple LLVM compiler,
we decided to be a bit more conservative
with the introduction of this.
We want everyone to be able to use it.
However, we didn't turn it on by default.
If you want these warnings,
and we suggest that you
really do want these warnings,
you can use "-w uninitialized",
or "-w all", to bring in these
uninitialized variable warnings.
We've also been conservative in that
we only want to diagnose warnings,
diagnose unused variables,
initialized variables,
in cases where the compiler
is certain there's a problem.
And so, you've probably been looking at
this example for a couple seconds,
is this an uninitialized variable use,
or is it not?
Well, we've initialized under
this if statement.
So if we should transform,
then we set delta.
And then later on in the code we check,
well,
should we transform and then use delta?
So clearly from the
programmer's standpoint,
this code is good.
Should transform is going to return
the same thing twice in a row,
of course.
Right, so this is some kind of global
program invariant that you
are thinking of in your head,
and the compiler has no idea
whether this invariant holds or not.
And so our way to deal with
this at this point is to say,
we're not going to
diagnose this as a warning,
because it's probably going
to lead to what you would
consider as false positives,
something that clearly
the compiler is wrong.
The way we tackle this is we
added another flag called -w
conditional uninitialized.
And this is for people that really
want to make sure that they don't
have uninitialized variables.
And they want to have warnings
about this sort of case,
where the compiler can't
reason about program invariants
or large-scale invariants,
and they want to see that,
and they're willing
to rewrite their code.
So this is the more aggressive
version for people that want to
deal with all of these problems.
-w uninitialized should
be good for anyone at all,
and we highly recommend
that you turn it on.
Let's look at something
specifically for Objective-C called
the InferredResultType.
Take a look at this little bit of code.
There's a bug here.
I'm sure you've all found it by now.
Yes, I hope.
No compiler that we've ever shipped
has been able to diagnose this,
because it doesn't understand how
these functions actually work.
What we've done with the
Apple LLVM compiler version 3 is
we've added some type inferencing
that allows us to detect this problem.
Now this is great.
You allocate an NSArray on
the right hand side.
You initialize that array.
Compiler now knows that that returns
an NSArray and can warn you that
you just assigned it over to a
variable that thinks it's an NS set,
which is a completely different class.
This is a ticking time bomb in
your source code if you're allowed.
Now we can actually diagnose this.
The way we do it is through inference.
We actually understand Cocoa conventions,
Cocoa naming conventions,
within the compiler to
understand that when you send
a message to alloc and init,
you get back an instance of that type.
We think this will be really great.
It detects a huge number of
subtle bugs that have been around
for a very long time in code.
We think you're going to like it.
Now this is just one
advancement to Objective-C.
Of course, you've also heard of Arc.
And we have another session
later on this week called
Objective-C Advancements in Depth,
where you can go to learn about other
advances to the Objective-C language.
With that,
let's move on to Xcode integration.
So one of the great things about
building your compiler as a modular
system is you can take some of
the components in that modular
system and put them into new places.
Like here we take the Clang parser
and front end and move it into Xcode
to give a better user experience.
First place you'll tend to see this
is in the live warnings and errors.
Essentially what's happening here
is as you're typing in your editor,
you're introducing new code,
and of course you're
introducing new bugs.
So what the compiler is going to
do is it's going to run behind the
scenes to check your source code to
see if you've introduced a problem.
If you have introduced a problem,
you'll get a little pop-up here.
So you get the underlying under
the issue in this particular code,
underlying the string literal,
and you get a little badge in the
left-hand side that indicates that
the compiler has found a problem here.
If you want to go solve it,
you can go click on the badge to get some
information about what the problem is,
fix the problem.
As soon as you fix that problem,
the warning goes away from your editor.
This is actually somewhat
of a change in the workflow.
We tend to write a bunch of code and then
build and see what the compiler does,
and then build and see what
the compiler does again.
Instead,
you can interact with the compiler here.
And once you've dealt with all of
the issues that it's diagnosed,
well at that point,
the file's going to compile cleanly.
And you can just build and
start testing your app.
So when you get one of these
live warnings or errors,
you can go click on the
badge on the left hand side,
and it's going to pop up
to something like this.
So it'll show you what the problem is.
The problem in this case is that
we have incompatible pointer types.
We tried to pass a character array,
this is string literal,
to something that expected an NSString.
Clearly that's not going to work.
Of course, this is one of those cases
that Objective-C programmers
tend to make this mistake.
And so the compiler actually
recognizes that this is the
problem and suggests to fix it.
So now you see how we've taken the fix
it feature from the compiler and surfaced
it in Xcode via this little pop-up.
What the pop-up suggests is the
simple correct fix to this problem,
which is introduce the @ sign to
turn this C string literal into
an Objective-C string literal.
You just accept the fix
it by clicking on that.
Your source code is updated
and the warning goes away.
Fixits can solve a number of problems.
So in this case, we fixed that problem,
but it turns out I introduced a bunch of
bugs in my one simple logging statement.
And here,
I used the wrong conversion specifier.
I used %d, that's for integers,
not %f for doubles,
but I had given a double.
Compiler, of course, can detect this,
reports it,
but it goes one step further and
actually suggests the replacement
that fixes your string literal
in place so you have the right
conversion specifier for using NSLog.
This is way better than going and
hunting through the NSLog documentation
to figure out what is the conversion
specifier I need in this particular case.
Compiler knows what it is,
it can check it,
it can tell you exactly how to fix
your code without doing anything else.
The fixits we've seen so far, however,
have been fairly simple.
When there's been a fixit to suggest,
it's been obvious what the answer was.
Introduce the @ sign,
introduce a missing semicolon, whatever.
Sometimes fixits aren't that simple.
So here we have a case where we're
doing a test with bitwise and,
and then we're doing an equality
comparison against zero.
This is suspicious,
because the precedence rules for
these operators in C are actually
a little bit weird and not usually
up with programmers' expectations.
And so in this case,
the compiler is going to warn about
it and suggest two different options.
Now the first option in this case
is "silence the compiler". This is
the "I know what I'm doing",
this is what I meant to write,
and what it's going to do is it's
going to introduce parentheses
around the equality expression,
because that's what's
evaluated first in this case,
I'm sure you all knew that.
It's going to introduce those parentheses
to tell the compiler "this is what
I meant", which silences the warning.
Of course, it also tells future
programmers that look at this,
"yes, this is actually what I meant,
there's no bug here". Of course,
in this case,
we're trying to do a bitwise test here,
and we look at the second option.
The second option is going to
insert the parentheses in the other
place around the first expression,
the bitwise "and", to evaluate that
first and test the result against zero.
This option changes the
semantics of the source code,
but in this case,
it actually fixes the bug in the source
code that was found by the compiler.
So when you see these fix it pop up,
look through the options,
decide what is the best option for you.
Either way,
we will silence the compiler and
move along so you can get back
to a clean editor with no issues,
and your file will compile
then with no errors.
So another place where we've surfaced
more information from the compiler
in Xcode is the notes feature.
So in previous examples,
there are a couple examples where
we had some sort of warning or
error that came out of the compiler,
and then there was a note that provided
additional information to tell you
that that warning or that error is
actually related to something else
in this other part of your source code.
[Transcript missing]
If you look in the issue navigator,
there's going to be this little
disclosure triangle next to the
incomplete implementation issue.
Select that triangle,
and now you get all the extra
information the compiler is giving you.
So in this case it's telling
you these three methods need
to be defined somewhere.
and David It's essentially a little
to-do list of what you actually
need to do to fix the problem.
Now if you were to go in and click
on one of those method definitions,
it's going to jump to the
declaration of that method,
which shows you the method that
hasn't been implemented yet,
and you get the choice of either
jumping back to the implementation
to go implement that method,
or realizing, hey,
I don't need this method anymore,
delete it at this point.
Either way, the note's going to go away,
and once you've resolved all
the problems in the note,
the warning is going to go away.
The last feature I want to talk
about in Xcode is code completion.
So the idea here is that Xcode has
always had a code completion engine,
but the compiler is really the tool
that understands your code better than
any other tool on the system ever can.
The compiler has to know everything about
the language that it has to compile.
And so it can actually give you more
accurate completions based on its deep
semantic knowledge of how the program
works and what's available at that point.
So in this case,
we're doing a simple completion in a
C++ or Objective C++ program that asks
for all of the entities that start
with M in the standard namespace.
Something we unfortunately couldn't do
with the previous code completion engine,
we can do now that we use the compiler,
because the compiler
understands everything.
It understands class templates,
and so it can give you the map
class template with placeholders
for all the template arguments.
It understands function templates
like max and make tuple and so on,
along with typedefs and everything else.
And so you can get more
completions out of this using all
of the features of the language.
Now, it can even reason about
complicated things.
So, this particular code looks really,
really simple.
All we have is some variable i,
we apply the arrow operator,
and ask for everything
starting with f there.
Behind the scenes, this is not so simple.
So I is actually an iterator into
one of the data structures that
comes out of the standard library.
What's an iterator?
Well, it's a custom class.
In this case, it's actually a class
template of some sort.
So behind the scenes,
what the code completion engine
is doing is it's understanding
all of C++ templates,
understanding all of
template instantiation,
how that happens.
Then it gets back to a class.
However, then it has to look
at the arrow operator,
and it introduces the notions
of operator overloading.
It understands operator overloading,
so it can see exactly
through that arrow operator,
it's overloaded,
and down to what the compiler would
actually see to give you the same
results the compiler would see.
This gives us more accurate completions,
and we can adjust the priority of
completions based on information such as,
well, what's the type that you actually
want to use at this particular point?
With that,
we're going to look at something
that's also based on the Clang
front end and integrated in Xcode.
It's called the Xcode Static Analyzer.
The Xcode Static Analyzer is a
really great tool that uses deep
compiler analysis techniques to
find bugs in your source code.
Now the Static Analyzer is interesting.
So the way it works is to actually
look at all of the various paths
through your program to find what
conditions would trigger a bug.
So you can imagine that in
the normal path of your code,
you have no problems.
However,
it could be the case that if you take
the if branch up here in your program,
and then a couple lines
down in the function,
well, you take this else branch down
here for some unrelated condition,
along just that one path,
you have some sort of bug.
You have a null pointer to reference.
Some kind of problem.
This is the kind of thing
that's hard to find in testing,
because you have to have those
conditions exactly right to
follow that path to hit the issue.
The Static Analyzer is going
to reason about all of the
problems that you have to solve.
All of your paths at the same
time to see if there are problems
along any of those paths,
and report those as issues.
The kinds of problems it can find?
Well, it can find these logic errors,
right?
Null dereference problems,
where you forgot to check whether
something was null before you
actually went and accessed it.
It'll produce an issue for that.
The static analyzer understands the APIs.
It understands how core foundation works,
and the underlining Unix APIs,
so it can tell you when
you're misusing those APIs.
It also knows Cocoa memory conventions.
It understands when things
are returned retained,
when things are released.
So it can detect memory leaks in your
program in a path sensitive manner.
and it's better just
to see how this works.
So here's an example of finding leaks
in a program using core foundation.
The example here, we're creating a
CFDate with CFDate create.
We do that in the first case.
And then when X is not zero,
we release that date.
The very end of the function,
we return this CFDate,
we return something.
So at this point, if you were testing it,
perhaps in all of your testing,
X is non-zero.
Maybe it varies widely,
but X never gets to be the value zero.
You'll never see a leak in your testing.
With the static analyzer,
it checks all of your paths.
It realizes, well, when X is zero,
We're not going to call this release,
and therefore this object
is going to be leaked.
And it actually shows you
this within the Xcode editor.
You can see the arrows flowing from
one point of your program to another.
That's describing the path
that it's taken through your
program to find this bug.
So it went to the CFD create.
It skipped over the if statement
and went directly to the return.
And this is exactly the case
under which this code leaks.
The Xcode static analyzer
can also reason about loops.
So in this case, we have two loops.
One that initializes an array,
and another one that both reads
and writes back to the array.
The static analyzer here is complaining
that you're reading a garbage
value when you read from the array.
Well these loops, they look the same.
It looks like there's no bug here.
But the static analyzer has actually
realized that because you're looping
over different constraints here,
In the first case, we only initialize the
first three elements.
In the second case,
we're reading all four of the elements.
So there's a bug here.
The static analyzer will describe it
to you by showing you the paths it took
through the program under which you'll
actually find this bug manifesting.
Static Analyzer is really a great tool.
And you can use this directly
from Xcode by going to the product
menu and selecting Analyze.
Analyze is essentially a special
kind of build of your program.
So it's essentially going
to run your entire program
through the compiler again,
but this time it's going to do some
detailed analysis of how your program
works and its use of the Cocoa APIs,
looking for leaks,
looking for API abuses,
looking for null dereferences.
Now this takes more time than
just a simple build does.
So there's a trade-off here.
On the other hand,
it does find real bugs in your
software that you want to fix
before they get into testing.
When it finds those problems,
it's going to report them the
same way that a compiler would.
So we have warnings and errors
reported from the compiler.
We also have static analyzer issues,
and these are reported both in your
editor and in the issue navigator.
So you can explore them,
find out what problems it
found in your source code.
Now if you love the static analyzer,
and I hope you all do,
you can actually turn it on
every time you do a build.
So you find the problems as
you introduce them before it
crashes your app in testing.
And here you can go into the
build settings for your project.
Under the build option setting
there's run static analyzer.
Just turn that on to yes,
and every time you hit build you
will also get static analysis results
along with the normal warnings.
Now, Static Analyzer has one new feature
this year inside Xcode for controlling
specifically what checks to do.
So we realized that Static Analyzer
has a bunch of different checks.
Not all checks are
interesting to all people.
So here you can again go into
your build settings and decide
what checks are important to you,
what checks find real
problems in your code,
turn just those on,
and you don't have to use other
checkers that you don't like.
We've done a lot of work on the
Xcode Static Analyzer this year,
and one big new feature is we
have full support for analyzing
C++ and Objective C++ programs.
Now C++ programmers can get all the same
benefits as Objective-C programmers,
and it's a good thing.
So you can see here the static analyzer
running on a very large C++ application,
which happens to be the
Apple LLVM compiler itself,
and finding a real bug.
So what's happening here is
a little bit interesting.
This is the dead stores checker.
And the error that the static analyzer
is giving here is that the value
that you stored to S is never read.
Now this is actually a
symptom of the real problem.
The real problem is that we
forgot to put break in here.
And that's allowed by the language.
Sometimes you do want to fall through.
So what the static analyzer is
doing is it's reasoning about
the paths in your program.
And what it realizes is that when
we jump into this case statement,
we allocate a new object
and assign it over to S.
That's fine.
We then fall through to the next case,
which seems to be fine from
the C language perspective.
We allocate a new object
and assign it to S,
which completely clobbers
the previous value of S.
And that object that was
previously assigned to S goes away.
This is almost always an indication of
something weird going on in your program.
And in this case,
we found the problem introduced
the additional break.
So we fixed the bug.
Since we're on the subject of C++, well,
let's talk about C++ a little bit more.
There's a whole lot of buzz
in the C++ community about
this thing we call C++ OX.
So C++ OX is an upcoming
revision to the C++ standard.
It's been in the C++ community
for about eight years.
They've been working on it,
and they've introduced major changes to
both the language side of C++ and the
standard libraries that come with it.
There's a whole pile of new language
features that are great to use,
and the C++ standard library has
been improved to pick up and use
those language features to give
you a better library experience,
and expanded with new
great functionality.
Now all of this is designed to
provide great backward compatibility
with your existing C++ applications.
So I'm thrilled to tell you here today
that we are providing C++ OX support
in the Apple LLVM compiler version 3.
Yay!
To get this support, again,
just go into your build settings,
and we have the C++
language dialect option.
You can now pick C++ OX to get
these great new C++ OX features.
If you also want to
rely on GNU extensions,
there's GNU++ OX,
which is all the C++ OX features,
plus the GNU extensions you're probably
accustomed to using within C++.
So nobody has managed to implement
all of the C++ OX language.
It's actually a huge set of new features.
We've done pretty well,
so we've tackled all of these
features in the last year or so,
but we're not going to go into any
detail in this talk about those features.
If you're interested in seeing
how some of these features work,
how they can be used to improve your app,
I recommend you come to the
LLVM technologies in-depth
session tomorrow afternoon,
where we'll tell you a bit more about
how these features actually work.
Now I said that C++/OX was
both a language thing,
which is covered by the
Apple LLVM compiler.
It's also enhancements to
the C++ standard library.
For this, we introduce completely new
LLVM C++ standard library,
which we call libc++.
Now this is a great new implementation
of the C++ standard library.
It's been re-engineered from the
ground up with the idea of building
the best library we can for C++/OX.
So we use these new C++/OX features
throughout to give a better performing,
easier to use standard library that
supports the entire C++/OX standard.
Now since we had this opportunity to
re-engineer our C++ standard library,
we could actually put to use all of
the things that we've learned from
maintaining the old C++ standard library.
So this new standard library
has better data structures that
take less memory and are faster.
It has better algorithms
that produce faster code.
So that your uses of the C++
standard library will just go faster.
It also introduces new functionalities
such as regular expressions,
smart pointers, hash tables, threading.
All of these new libraries that
came into the C++/OX standard
as part of the standard library,
these are provided as part of libc++.
libc++ is part of the LLVM project
and as such it's fully open source.
You can go learn more information
about it at libcxx.llvm.org.
And if you happen to love working on C++,
you can go to libcxx.llvm.org.
you can go learn more information
about it at libcxx.llvm.org.
And if you happen to love working on C++,
you can go learn more information
about it at libcxx.llvm.org.
And if you happen to love working
on C++ template libraries,
you can even come join us.
No takers?
Okay.
So we have better data
structures and algorithms.
I want to show you one of the
coolest algorithms in libc++.
And this is the sort algorithm.
So here we have the sort algorithm,
and we're comparing our
existing C++ standard library,
which is lib_standard_c++.
You've been using it from GNU.
And lib_c++.
And so this performance
chart is based on time,
so smaller is better.
And we're showing the
variation in performance of the
lib_standard_c++ sorting algorithm,
depending on how the input looks.
and of course the algorithm is
going to vary because different
algorithms are better for
different distributions of data.
Now the libc++ approach to solving
this problem is it actually recognizes
these different kinds of patterns.
When the whole sequence or when
some sub-sequence of the sorted
sequence fits into one of these cases,
it can use a specialized algorithm that
does a better job at sorting faster.
And doing so we get huge wins
in many of the common cases,
many times faster than the
previous sorting algorithm.
Now you notice there's one
case where we weren't faster,
and that's in the random case.
If there's truly random data,
there is some cost to
this pattern recognition,
and we end up being a little bit slower.
This is a perfectly acceptable
engineering trade-off since data
that you actually get to be sorted,
it's never random.
It has these substructures.
We can zoom in on those,
provide a better algorithm,
and give you better overall sorting
performance out of this library than
we could in the previous library.
So libc++ is now available in Xcode 4.2,
the same Xcode that has the new
Apple LLVM compiler with C++ OX features.
If you build your app against libc++,
you can deploy it to both Lion and iOS 5.
Selecting the C++ standard library is now
available in the Xcode build settings.
Right next to the C++ language dialect,
you can choose to use libc++.
And together,
C++ OX support in the compiler
and C++ OX support in the new
libc++ standard library gives an
absolutely wonderful C++ OX experience
for developing applications.
We're going to talk a little bit
more about libc++ in tomorrow's
LLVM technologies in-depth session
in Pacific Heights in the afternoon.
With that,
I'm going to turn it back over to Bob,
who's going to talk about
compiler performance.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Doug.
So compilers are all about performance.
We spend a lot of our time trying
to make sure we get two different
kinds of performance for you.
One, build time.
We want your apps to build really fast
so you don't have to sit and wait.
The second kind of performance
is the code quality.
We want to optimize your apps so
that your users don't have to wait.
So let's start looking at build time.
This is a graph showing the build
speed in debug mode for a Mac OS app,
particularly the Sketch example app.
We're going to compare the build speed
with GCC against the Apple LLVM compiler.
So we've defined here the
build speed of GCC is 1.
Bigger bars are better.
The Apple LLVM compiler builds
this app more than twice as fast.
Sketch is a small example,
so you may be wondering,
does this same kind of win carry
over to a really big application?
I suspect most of you are
familiar with the Preview app,
so let's look at that.
And you see that the Apple LLVM compiler
is about twice as fast building preview.
And to put that into perspective,
on my machine it takes about a minute
to build preview in debug mode.
So that twice as fast build time
cuts that time that I have to
wait down to about 30 seconds.
Instead of waiting for a minute,
I only have to wait for 30 seconds.
That's a huge win and will
save you a lot of time.
So that's for debug builds.
What about release builds?
If you're tuning performance,
you may need to be building in
release mode with full optimizations.
So let's look at that.
This graph is going to show
build time in release mode,
this time for iOS.
We've taken five industry
standard spec benchmarks,
Again,
we're comparing build speed against GCC.
So GCC has a build speed of 1.
Bigger bars are better,
and the Apple LLVM compiler is faster
across the board on these apps.
And in fact, it's typical to get build
speeds two to three times faster
with the Apple LLVM compiler.
Again, saving you time while
you're building your app.
So the other kind of performance
that I mentioned is not build time,
but the quality of the
code that we generate,
so that your apps will run fast.
Looking at those same
five standard benchmarks,
again running on iOS,
comparing against GCC,
we're getting speed ups from
11% all the way up to 26% on
these same five applications.
This is huge.
This is free performance for your apps,
if they're anything
like these benchmarks.
And all you need to do to get
this performance is to switch your
compiler to the Apple LLVM compiler.
So I want to zoom in for
a minute on one area where
performance really matters a lot,
and that is media applications.
In most cases,
if you have some sort of high
performance media computation,
it's best to use one of
the standard frameworks.
Sometimes you need more custom code.
You need to do something that
isn't supported directly.
One option that's available to you
now with the Apple LLVM compiler
is to vectorize your code.
I have an example up here
to show how we can do this.
This is just a toy example I made
up where we're going to iterate
through two arrays of vectors.
and multiply them and then
accumulate the result.
So the syntax that we're using here,
if you're familiar with OpenCL,
it should look familiar because
this is the same syntax used for
vector programming with OpenCL.
There's a set of predefined types.
Int32 by 4, for example,
is a vector of four 32-bit integers.
You can initialize those
directly in your code.
And you can apply standard
C operators to those vector types.
So the neon vector unit in
ARM processors has a very powerful
set of instructions that can do much
more than these standard C operators.
What if you want to access some
of those more esoteric functions?
We have a solution for that as well.
There's a standard set of intrinsics
defined by ARM to be used for
programming the neon vector unit.
This example here I've taken
from an IDCT transform.
This is real code.
This is something that would be
used when displaying a JPEG image.
I'm not going to go into all of it,
but that first function call
there is doing a saturating,
rounding, doubling, multiply,
returning the high half
of each vector element.
You just can't write that in C very well.
So you write it as a function call.
The compiler is smart enough to
recognize this is an intrinsic,
and it's going to compile that down to
a single instruction in your program.
So you can get great performance.
Obviously,
if you're going to go to the effort
of rewriting your code like this,
you want to make sure that it's
worthwhile and that it really pays off.
So let's look at what we get.
This graph is again going to
compare performance of GCC against
the Apple LLVM compiler.
I want to point out the
scale here is not percentage.
This is how many times faster.
The first benchmark, Galaxy,
is simulating the gravitational
fields within a galaxy of stars.
GCC is defined by a rate of one.
And the Apple LLVM compiler is about
four times faster running this app.
IDCT, this is the same transformation
I mentioned in the example
from the previous slide.
Here we see the Apple LLVM compiler
generates code that
runs seven times faster.
BigMult.
This is doing multiplication of very,
very large integers.
This is typically used in
public key cryptography.
The LLVM compiler generates code
that is about 21 times faster.
So we're pleased to announce we
have all this great support for
vector programming on iOS now.
So I hope we've convinced you,
looking at some of these features,
that the LLVM compiler would be
a great option for you to use.
And if you're thinking
about switching to use it,
what do you have to do in
your code to make use of it?
The good news is,
usually you don't have to do anything.
It just works.
But it is a different compiler.
There's a few cases that you
may run into occasionally.
So we're going to take a little
bit of time today to go through
some of the more common cases.
Doug talked about the great warnings
that we get in the LLVM compiler.
Generally, that's a good thing,
but if you're like me,
you like to get your project
to build with no warnings.
And so you're getting new
warnings you didn't get before.
How do you turn them off?
Here's an example.
This is a simple function I made up.
It's got an unused argument.
Typically,
this happens when you've got some
conditional code that's turned off,
and the compiler is warning about it.
So the programmer has gone in
here and added a dummy use of the
argument to tell the compiler,
"I know it's unused.
Don't warn me about it." And with GCC,
that works.
It will not warn because now it says,
"Ah, this argument is used."
The Apple LLVM compiler
doesn't fall for that trick.
It says, well, the argument is used,
but that expression you put in,
that's not used.
So the first solution in any kind of
thing like this is to fix your code.
And in this case,
we can just insert a void
cast to tell the compiler,
yeah, I know, I really meant it,
it's not used.
Another option, if you notice at the end
of that warning message,
it's showing you the exact warning
option that controls the message.
And so what you can do is
to disable that warning,
either in Xcode or on the command line.
You can insert a no in there and make w
no unused value and just turn that off.
And we tell you exactly which
option you need to turn off.
What if you find this
to be a useful warning,
but there's some piece of code,
maybe it's from a third party,
or something you don't want to change,
but you still want the warning?
And we have a solution for that as well.
You can put pragmas around this code.
This is the same example.
You see the warning from Xcode.
If you put a diagnostic push pragma
at the beginning of a region,
and then a pop diagnostic
at the end of the region,
within that region you can change
the settings for diagnostics.
In particular here,
we add this diagnostic ignored pragma
to say ignore the unused value warning.
Another difference between the
LLVM compiler and GCC is in
terms of the default language.
GCC defaults to the
C89 language standard.
The Apple LLVM compiler defaults to C99,
so now we're only one decade behind.
And in particular,
this shows up often with
inline function semantics.
GCC, I'm sorry, C89 does not define a
feature for inline functions.
But there is an extension
in GCC to do that.
And unfortunately,
that extension from GCC conflicts with
the way C99 defines inline functions.
Here's an example.
It's a simple minimum function
where if you compile this with GCC,
it may work fine.
You switch to the LLVM compiler,
and you get this scary-looking
warning from the linker.
And the issue here is that sometimes an
inline function in C99 is not actually
emitted out into the object file,
so the linker can't find a definition.
And the best solution for you in
cases like this is to switch your
code to use static inline functions.
The good thing about static inline is
that it behaves exactly the same between
GCC and the LLVM compiler and C99,
so you'll also get more portable code.
Here's another GCC extension
that may cause problems for you.
C, the language,
has a feature of variable length arrays.
C++ does not.
But GCC lets you do it anyways.
So what we do with the LLVM compiler
is to allow you to use variable
length arrays in C++ as long as those
are arrays of plain old data types,
pod types.
If you're not familiar with those,
a plain old data type is
something like an integer.
Anything with a complicated constructor
or destructor would not be a pod type.
So if you see an error message
like this from the LLVM compiler,
the best thing to do is to change your
code to use a standard C++ container,
like a vector,
instead of the variable length array.
Another C++ issue relates
to name lookup semantics.
Here's an example.
It's a template class for a stack.
And then we then instantiate the
stack with integer types using a
standard vector to implement that.
And with GCC, this would work fine.
With the LLVM compiler, you get an error.
What's going on?
The issue here is that GCC does
not correctly implement
the C++ language standard.
And it's complaining because that
pushback identifier is undeclared.
The problem is that at the point
where the template is defined,
the language standard says
you can't see that identifier.
I'm not going to go into
all the details on that,
but the important point is that
the LLVM compiler shows you
exactly where the problem is,
and it shows you how to fix it.
If you insert that "this" reference,
where it tells you, the error goes away.
If you run into that,
just apply the fixits and
you'll have more portable code.
Besides moving to the LLVM compiler,
you may also want to move to
automatic reference counting.
You've heard a lot about
that at the conference.
What we're going to recommend
as a first step for that is that
you switch to the LLVM compiler
and clean up all your warnings.
And the reason for that is that
warnings in non-ARC mode often
become errors in ARC mode.
In order to implement ARC,
we formalized a lot of best
practices in Objective-C code.
If you'd like to learn more about that,
I'll give another reference to
the Objective-C Advancements
in-depth talk on Friday morning.
So those are some tips for transitioning
your code to the LLVM compiler.
And hopefully you're all
eager to go out and try it.
And you're wondering,
what do you need to do?
You need to get Xcode 4.1 or 4.2.
We recommend using those versions.
And here in the build settings,
you can select your compiler.
If you go to the build settings,
you can search for compiler.
You'll find this compiler setting and
switch to the Apple LLVM compiler.
You'll see here, it's showing in the
screenshot version 2.1.
What's up with that?
We were talking about version 3.
Xcode 4.1 is shipping with version
2.1 of the Apple LLVM compiler.
This is basically a bug fix
release of the compiler.
We've added the W uninitialized option.
There's better C++ standard conformance.
But otherwise, this is not where we're
putting the new features.
To get all the new features,
You'll want to move to Xcode 4.2,
where we have version
3 of the LLVM compiler,
with support for automatic
reference counting.
One feature we didn't mention here today
is that this version of the compiler
will support GCOV code coverage testing.
We've got all the new
C++/OX features that Doug described,
and also better code generation.
If you'd like to learn more
about the better code generation,
come to the LLVM Technologies in-depth
talk tomorrow afternoon.
We'll have a lot of
good information there.
So to summarize,
we've got two releases coming up.
As shown by the highlights here,
in Xcode 4.1,
the default compiler is LLVM GCC.
In Xcode 4.2,
the default becomes the LLVM compiler.
And there's one more change.
In 4.2, GCC is going away.
So what this means for you is
that if you're still using GCC,
this is the time to try out
one of the other compilers.
Let us know if there's any problems.
We'll be in the lab this afternoon.
Come by, try it out.
And if you find anything that
you really can't get to work,
please file bugs.
Let us know about your issues.
So the Apple LLVM compiler is the
future for Apple in compilers.
We're putting all of our
development work there.
It helps you find bugs in your
code with good diagnostics,
the static analyzer.
It gives you great performance.
And we ask that you switch your
apps today or as soon as you can.
If you'd like more
information or pointers,
I refer you to Michael Jurowicz,
our developer tools evangelist.
You can also visit the
LLVM project online.
And if you do find issues
related to moving away from GCC,
file bugs:
developer.apple.com/bugreporter.
And I suspect you'll find some
good tips on transitioning in
the Apple Developer Forums.
There's two related sessions:
LLVM Technologies in Depth,
tomorrow afternoon at 2:00.
Objective C Advancements in Depth,
Friday morning.